AWS Cloud Practitoner Notes:
 EC2 -> Auto Scaling -> Elastic Load Balancer -> SNS / SQS .
 
 1. EC2:
		Server, available in multiple instance types based upon purpose and performance and pricing, widly used is on demand
		on-demand-pay only how much used
		Vertical scaling - increse the size of instance.
		Horizontal scaling - increase the no of instances.
2. Auto Scaling:
		Couple / De-Couple additional EC2 servers to the applications depends upon loads to make its availabilty better.
		Minimun, Desired, Maximum
		De-Couples when load is adequated.
		
3. ELB:
		Divide the load to availble EC2 servers and aviods the over loading and idle time of EC2 servers
		can be operate external loads and internal loads,
		ie.,Takes requests from external users and divides equally and send the same to available servers.
		Takes requests from EC2 inernally and send the same to available to resources.
		xx- if EC2 servers increse, all available servie should incresase to aviod the conflict.

4. Queing - SNS or SQS:
		if two applications communicate each other is called tightly coupled. in this case if one app failes it 
		may lead to loss data or crash the entire sysytem.
		To avoid such confilcts, applications should build lossly-coupled.i.e., app1-> que -> app2.
		so that que can receive, store, send messages. it is called micro services.
		SNS - publish/subscribe method, ower can publish messages to a SNS topic and customer who subscribed the SNS topic can receive notifications.
		
5. AWS Lambda:
		Serverless(FaaS) which means we cannot see servers, maintaining, scaling and etc can be managed by lambda itself.
		Upload code - set trigger from event source - code runs only wn triggered - pay for compute time.
		i.e., we write resize code and uploaded it on lambda - code triggers wn image uploads - code runs for rezize the image.
		Trigger may be a event source, AWS services i.e, EC2, S3 etc.,HTTP.
		
		AWS Elastic Container Service
		AWS Kubarnetes Service
		AWS Fargate
		
6. AWS Regions:
		AWS Regions are geographically seperated groups.
		AWS has built multiple Regions to ensure availability. Each regions has Availability Zone(AZ) and each AZs has one or more Data Centers in it.
		each regions must have more than one AZs at a certain distance with low latency.
	AWS Edge Locations:
		a global content deliver service.
		if a company is in brazil and customes are from chine, in this case we can use aws cloud front rather the moving to china region.
		Edge loactions rus with AWS Cloudfront, cashe and copy of files will stored in a cloudfront and customer from china can get those data faster.
	AWS Outposts:
		Extends aws indrastructure and servuces to your on-premices data centers.
		Enables us to run infracture in hybrid cloud approach.
	
7. Intracting with AWS Services:
		1.Amazon Management Console - web based and allows us to do servces manually deploy and monitor.
		2.AWS Coomand Line Interface(CLI) - command based, minimze the human error and requires scrots line execute the services.
		3.AWS SDK - Software development kit. Helps us to intract with services.
		4..AWS Elastic Bean Stak(EBS) - EC2 insance based, allows us to write a code and configure services to adjust capacity, load balancing, 
		auto scaling and monitoring.-Fully automated EC2 service.
		5.Amazon Cloud Formation - (IaaS) - provides infrastructure as service and allows us to create multiple servies as code or text.
		fully automated and reusable. -XX-

8.Virtual Private Cloud:
		Establish dedicated boundaries to aws resources. nothing goes in or out without certain permission.
		Dedicated virtual cloud, allow us to launch aws resorces in a isolated cloud by VPN.
		inside VPC thers is section called Subnet that can contan aws resources such as EC2.
		Subnet - is a partition of VPC, we can launch aws resources in it and can create gateway to that subnet.
		
	Internet Gatwway (IGW):
		Provies gate to a VPC to public traffic.
	
	VPN :
		Virtual Private Network - Virtual Private Gateway establish VPN to connect VPC from on-premics resources and datacenters.
		VPN allows protected traffic into VPC.
	
	AWS Direct Connection:
		Private Connection from on-prem to VPC, established by fibre cables.
		Increase bandwidth od a connection.

9. Subnets:
		Subnets are section of VPC, aws resources can be grouped inside a subnet based upon security groups.
		Subnets can private or public. 
		Public Subnet - contan aws resources that are accecible by public. ex-e-store.
		Private Subnet - contains aws resources that are accessibel by private traffic, ex - DB contains customer details, order history.
		public and private subnet can communicate each other EC2 runs in public subnet can communicate private DB in a same VPC.
		Each subnets runs under ACL or Security Group.
		
10. Seurity Group:
		Resource level security, or instance level security, i.e.,EC2 can be configured inside security groups which is inside a subnet which is inside a VPC.
		Statful Security like door man. have some memeory in it and it remebers items that pass through.so wn leaving the instance,
		it allows items without checking.
		while create security group, il will deny all inbound and outbound actions by default.
		
11.Network Access Control List(ACL):
		Subnet level virtual firewall
		when launch VPC, ACL can be created by default but it allow packets ingoing and outgoing without and restrictions untill we set our
		permissions to our ACL, we can also have custom ACL, but it restrict all in and out packets untill we set permissions in it.
		Stateless Security, checks each time like passport officer wheather item is present in allowed list or not.
		
12. Route 53:
		Highly available and scalable DNS service.
		Route53 is DNS(Domani Name System) DNS Resolution service that provides IP address to any given domanin name or website name.
		i,e.,www.aws.amazon.com ---> 191.1.1.90 - Translates domain name into IP address.
		Route53 also does traffic routing to certain routing policies.
		
13. AWS Storage Services:
		When we launch EC2 instance, EC2 comes with local storage called instabce storage.
		When we sto EC2 instance, the data that we stored in instance storage will be deleted.
		So its best advised to store onlt temp datas.
		We can attach some external storage available in AWS like EBS, S3..
		
	Elastic Block Store(EBS): 
		EBS is one of storage services in AWS. max size is 16TB, SSD by defalut and has HDD option.
		Provides block storage and avl in different sizes and purpose.
		privided block storage, i.e., if we upload 80GB of vide file and want to do some small correction, the file in EBS has stored as 
		block storage i.e, 5GB in each block hence we made anychange, that particular block gets updated rather than entore 80GB updated. thats
		why S3 has max object upload size of 5GB.
		can be attached to EC2, and can withstand stop and start interupption.
		snapshot - a service used to backup the datas that are stored in EBS.
		
	AWS Simple Storage Service (S3) :
		S3 is a god of storage service available in AWS. serverless and limiless storage. regionly adistributed (global) and has backup in 3 AZs.
		Unlimited in size and each object max size is 5TB.
		S3 stores datas as objects while EBS stores datas as block storage. and we need to upload that 80GB flile again whenever we need to make changes.
		An Object contains - File, Metadata and key. Here., File - actual file, Metadata - contains information about the file,
		wn it was created, size  and etc., Key - indetifier of the file.
		S3 can host static websites since S3 buckets and objects comes with urls.
		S3 has versioning, we can have multiple versions of a file and its a delete prevention.
		S3 Lifecycle Policy: We can set S3 lifecycle policy to same some cost. i.e., data can be stores 90 initially later it should
		moved to S3-IA and certain time it should moved to S3 Glacier
		Max object size in S3 bucks are 5TB / Object.
		-XX- S3 availble in  different tiering / classes options based upon purpose and pricing.
		1. S3 Standard : High avilabilty and cost, stores data in min 3 AZs. designed for frequently accecible datas.
			also S3 Standard offers 11 9s of durability. S3 Standard is 99.999999999% Durable and High cost.
		2. S3 Standard-Infrequent access (S3 Standard IA): availabile as same as S3 Standard also stored in min 3AZs, but low storage price and high
			retrival price. suits for data infrequently accesed and highly available.i.e., websites,.
		3. S3 Standard One Zone IA: it stores data in single AZ. lower price than S3 IA. we can choose oneIA if want ro save cost and 
			data can be easily reproduce if single AZ failed.
		4. S3 Intelligent Tiering: if data was not accessed 30 days it moves data to S3-IA and if accessed the bring back to S3-STD.
			suitable for unkown or cahange access patterns. and requires monitoring and automation costs.
		5. S3 Glacier Instant Retrival: Archived storage and retrives data within millisecs as same prformance as S3-STD.
		6. S3 Glacier Flexible Retrival: low cost, aable to retirive datas within few mins to few hours.
			suitable for retrive customer old photos videos and etc.,
		7. S3 Glacier Deep Archive: low cost storage in the cloud, suits for data accessed once in a year or two, has supports long-term
			retention and digital prevention for datas. able to retrive datas in 12-48 hrs.
		8. S3 Outposts: delivers storage to on-prem environment.
	
	Amzon Elastic File Sysytem:
		Used to access the stored file from different AZs while EBS allows single AZs.
		Autimatically scalable.
		
14. Amazon RDBMS:
		Relational Data Base Management Systems - is provides RDS service in AWS.
		RDS cab be queried by SQL.
		RDS Engines are Amazon Aurora, Postgre SQL, My SQL, Oracle, Microsoft SQL, Maria DB
		AWS RDS comes with security, aurto patches, DB setup, Backup, Encryption while store and Transit.
	
	Amazon Aurora:
		Comapatiable with My SQL and Postgre SQL.
		5 Times faster than std My SQL and 3 Times faster than std Postgre SQL.
		Aurora replicated six copies of datas acress AZs and continiously backups data to S3.
		
	Dynamo DB:
		Dynamo DB is Serverless and auto scaling.
		Dynamo DB is Non-Relational Database Sysytem.
		Dynamo DB is No-SQL Database.
		It is built for purpose case and has millisecond responce time.able to handle millions of traffic.
		Dynamo DB stores datas in table as key value pairs or items and attributes pairs. so that we can add remove items at any time.
		we can use simple queries by keys to fetch datas rather than complex queries to fetch datas from multiple tables.
		not suitable for buisssness alaytics and suitable to non complex joints and mllisec responce.
		
	Amazon Redshift:
		A Data Ware House - able to collect daats from diffferent resources.
		Redshift can be used to handle big data BI solutions.
		
15. Data Migration Services:
		DMS used to migrate datas from existing on-prem to AWS or Existing AWS DB to another AWS DB for disaster recovery, backup and etc.,
		The source is fully functional while migration happens.
		1.Homogeneous Migration: same source--> DMS --> same target
		2.Hetrogeneous Migration: Different source--> scheme conversion tool--> DMS --> Different target.
		Tyoes:
		1.Development and Test database migrations.
		2.Database Consolidation - small DBs migrated to one big DB by DMS. combining several DBs into Single DB.
		3.Contineous Database Replication - Diaster Recovery.
	
	
ELastic Container Service (ECS) - 

AWS API Gateway - Used to create RESTFUL APIs in AWS.

AWS Internet of Things (IoT) - 
	
16. AWS Shared Resonsibility Model:
		Which means AWS env secured by both customer and AWS, customer resonsibility (security) is like biuilding owner whilw AWS is the builder
		that house.
		
	Identiyy Access Managemment (IAM): Authentication and Authoriziation as Service (AaaS)
		Most imortant factor in AWS which controls all the user, access, Permissions and role.
		By default IAM has no permissions and accces, we have to set when we create.
		IAM User - Person or application that intract with aws services and it contains user and credintials.
		IAM Policy - is a document (JSON) whcih contains permissions and effect can be assigned to IAM user. Each policy has two effects, allow or deny.
		IAM Group - Collection or Group of IAM users, we can attach poicy to over a IAM group to grant permissions to all the IAM users in a group.
		i.e., - if a cashier moved to inventory, we can remove him from cashier group and add him to inventory group which has contains to inventory policies.
		this ensures user only have the permissions that are required.
		IAM Role - if a person needs to take different jobs he required all the permissions, IAM role alows users to switch between roles,
		at first, we should grant permission to switch roles.
		While switching roles, user will get only the current role permissions, and previous role permissions will be revoked.
		i.e., if cashier moved to inventory, he willl be able to access only inventory and all the previous roles will be revoked.
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		